# January 21, 2026

Part of [[Axial-Splitting]].

Somehow, it seems, I've gone this long without a dedicated step for tapering and filtering the traces all at once, at one time and in one place. Before, I had multiple places where the taper and filter occurs, and since ObsPy `filter` and `taper` are functions that work in-place, each subsequent taper and filter slightly overwrites and modifies the data. That's why there were issues downstream, and that's why I would get different results for running the same function multiple times. The stream data was being overwritten each time.

The good news is that now **angle of incidence and rectilinearity are exactly identical to Christian's results**, just like back-azimuth. The first event has an S-wave SNR that is also identical (to like 6 digits identical!), but then there is discrepancy in subsequent events. So at least at first, SNR is being computed correctly — I think.

A good way to test this theory is to remove the first event from consideration and run the SNR calculations again. If I get the exact correct SNR for the second event, but not for subsequent ones, then something is wrong with the loop. If I get the second SNR incorrect, it may be the case that my function is only working with the sampling of the first event, but not the others, and that's a bigger problem with the function. I'm hoping it's the first one.

Okay, I just ran the test, and unfortunately the result is **door number two**. So for some reason, my function works exactly as it should for the first event and gets the exact correct SNR — but then it doesn't work for subsequent events. Why? The loop must be correct, but my gut says that something is happening with the sampling rate that isn't quite right. I wonder if it is more variable than I've been led to believe. I'll comment out the test where I pop event 0 from `organized_waveforms` and then look into Christian's code again to see what's going wrong.

---

Okay, so the pre-processing criteria are mostly aligned. Something is still going wrong with S-wave SNR and I'm not exactly sure what — but it is mostly there. I ran more events from Christian's catalog and looked at actual splitting results. It seems to me the splitting is having some trouble finding the minima, based on the plots.

So I looked again at Christian's code, particularly in `run_sws.py`, and **it all became clear. He's not sending anything into MFAST — he didn't end up using MFAST after all, but instead wrote his own shear-wave splitting analysis, from start to finish.** So the big table, it turns out, was unnecessary.

Yet Christian's method only looks at one window in parameter space and performs a grid search. He looks at one window, which is fixed, finds multiple minima and ranks them by RMS and rectilinearity. This does not represent the Teanby method of windowing and clustering.
