# Project Takeover — September 2025

Part of [[Axial-Splitting]].

As of September 2025, I, Michael Hemmett, have taken over the Axial Shear-Wave Splitting project working with William Wilcock and Marine Denolle. The project was started by Christian Baillard in 2018–19, but it had not been worked on since then.

Christian's original project used the Axial Seamount catalog with original locations for all permanent stations, from January 22, 2015 through the summer of 2017. He used MFAST with SAC and TauP to perform the analysis, based on Silver and Chan (1991) for the original splitting, and with the windowing and clustering method of Teanby et al. (2004). All of his plotting and analysis was done in Python, and I have access to most scripts and results in the Axial Splitting Google Drive.

Christian had results for this whole time period; he'd presented a poster on the results and had a manuscript in progress, as well as a literature review up to date through 2019.

I sought to replicate Christian's results exactly while using the most up-to-date tools for maximum reproducibility: everything should be done in Python, not also Fortran, C++, etc.

First, I developed a shear-wave splitting workflow from data loading, to pre-processing, to splitting, all done in Python. I then began comparing my results with Christian's results so as to exactly replicate what he did. Christian spent a long time identifying which parameters would be most suitable for this specific application of SWS at Axial using S-phases, so we want to retain all that work he did by exactly replicating his results.

I opted to use the SWSPy package developed by Tom Hudson as a suitable alternative to MFAST. Comparing the MFAST manual and Christian's implementation of it, I had to locally adapt the package to exactly replicate the method in MFAST, following Silver and Chan and Teanby. See the SWS Parameter Comparison Google sheet for exact specifications of what was adapted and how.

As I started adapting the splitting package to match MFAST, I began to uncover new challenges. First, my pre-processing criteria (back-azimuth, angle of incidence, P-wave rectilinearity, S-wave SNR) did not exactly match Christian's results for the same events.

Additionally, my catalog did not exactly match Christian's either. I had been using the old Axial catalog with original locations from the same time period (Jan 22, 2015 – mid 2017), but my locations and particularly my depths, in addition to my catalog's picks, did not match that of Christian.

## Christian's Workflow

- Imports NonLinLoc catalog; processing calculates azimuth (az), incidence (inc), rectilinearity (rec).
- The original catalog is stored on Christian's Dropbox, it is not included in the Axial Splitting drive — I wonder if it's related to his previous project? Location: `/home/baillard/Dropbox/_Moi/Projects/Axial_SWS/PROG/SWS_nlloc/split_020.nlloc`.
- The exact functionality to replicate back-azimuth is reliant on a function in the `general` module.

## Definition of files in Axial Splitting

- **`test_assign_origin_time.py`**: imports nlloc file, pulls out P- and S-picks, then assigns an origin time to them. Defines `obs_id` which is present in final data output.
- **`run_sws.py`**: the main script to do shear-wave splitting analysis automatically.
	- Pulls up the nlloc catalog, defines `p_window`, `s_window`, `fs_window` (dominant period), S-SNR window, S-SNR threshold, incidence threshold, rectilinearity threshold, freq min and max, max lag allowed, adapt size of SWS window.
	- Calls the `jurkevics` function, which calculates azimuth, incidence, rectilinearity, and largest eigenvalue. `jurkevics` is in `general`. Note: since incidence is in the P-polarization analysis section, that suggests that the incidence angle is calculated on the P-wave window, not using TauP or nlloc.
	- SNR is calculated from `swm.SNR_pick`. Min lambdas calculated with `sw.get_LAMBDAS`. Here, `sw` is `shearwavesplit.py`, and `swm` is `sws_methods.py`.
	- `SNR_pick` takes `data` as input (as defined in `sws_methods.py`) and in `run_sws.py` data is called as `xy_array`, which is constructed with the function `stream2data`, which is found in the `general` module.

## Integrating Christian's missing code

I got a few Python scripts from the `general` folder, including `projection`, `plotwaveform`, and `util`. These contain what I need to fix the rectilinearity, SNR, and incidence calculations. Even so, integrating these functions did not seem to give me total alignment.

So far I've just tried to fix incidence and rectilinearity — they're from the P-window, and I have the right section of the window from Christian's code: 0.02 seconds before to 0.1 seconds after. Even with all of that, and adapting his implementation for my code, I can't replicate his rectilinearity results. And I can't replicate his incidence results either, which is just an eigenvalue decomposition problem on the P-wave window as well. It also seems that I don't have the right catalog.

From `run_sws.py`, I see the catalog I need is:

```
nlloc_file = '/home/baillard/Dropbox/_Moi/Projects/Axial_EQ/DATA/CATALOG/AXIAL.PHASE.FINAL_3D_V2.nlloc'
```

Which is still on Christian's computer. I can go get a 32 GB flashdrive from the HUB bookstore and then go get his catalog from Oceanography.
